Hi friends
In this video we are going to discuss about structure padding.
So how is a structure stored in memory? see an example
We have a structure example here which is having 2
members char c and int i
Now we know that char takes one byte and int
takes four bytes
And now we are printing the size of structure here
So what will be the output? Is it five? No
char occupies one byte
We have three bytes remaining here
But an integer value takes four byte so it cant
be placed here
So the compiler adds three bytes padding after the char
value and stores the integer value separately
And this is called structure padding.
So here the output will be eight and not five
Now see another example
We have the structure example with members c1 of
character type, i of integer type and c2
of character type
So char occupies One byte here and we have
3 bytes remaining But an integer cannot be placed so
three bytes will be padded And the integer i will
be stored in the next four bytes and next char
occupies one byte again
Three bytes are remaining so it will be padded
So here when we print the size of structure we
get the output as 12
Now see another example
Let's rearrange the previously declared structure
Members now gets the output
This time it will be eight here
First integer occupies four bytes then c1 of character
type will occupy one byte
Now three bytes are remaining and this three bytes is
enough to store another character
So c2 will be placed here
Now the output will be eight so structure padding is
taking extra memory space than it actually need
So let us see how to avoid structure padding
We can use the attribute packed while we declare the
structure
It will prevent a compiler from adding these extra spaces
Now let us see the benefits of Structure Padding
Even though structure padding occupies additional memory space it will
significantly increase the system performance
Let's see how structure padding can improve system performance
Let's take 32 bit processor or CPU. a 32
bit processor means the processor can read at most
32 bit at a time
The 32 bit members such as Int, Float should
start at a memory address which is a multiple
of 4 such as 1024,1028,1032 etcetera for efficient read
or write operations
So when structure members are packed using the packed attribute
like this the integer value i will be stored in
such a way that the first three bytes are stored
in the first block  and the remaining one byte is stored
in the next block
So to read the integer data the processor needs to read
two blocks and the compiler has to
generate more code to extract the Non Aligned Data member
so this will significantly reduce the system performance
In normal declaration with padding the compiler adds three bytes
space after the char variable so that the integer variable i
will be perfectly placed in the next block and the
processor needs to read only once
And this is how the structure padding improves system performance
So we can say that if we need more performance
we can use structure padding and if we need more
memory efficiency then we can use structure packing
So that's all and thank you for watching this video